Titre: Déclaration de M. Emmanuel Macron, président de la République, sur l'intelligence artificielle, à Paris le 10 février 2025.
Date: 2025-02-10
Source: https://www.vie-publique.fr/discours/297334-emmanuel-macron-10022025-intelligence-artificielle?egn-publisher=dila_vp&egn-name=informer_opendata_discours

Discours
Partager la page
Imprimer
Télécharger au format pdf
Envoyer par Email
Copier dans le presse-papier
Partager sur Facebook (nouvelle fenêtre)
Partager sur X (anciennement Twitter - nouvelle fenêtre)
Partager sur Linkedin (nouvelle fenêtre)
Partager sur Bluesky (nouvelle fenêtre)
Déclaration de M. Emmanuel Macron, président de la République, sur l'intelligence artificielle, à Paris le 10 février 2025.
Société
Prononcé le
10 février 2025
Intervenant(s) :
Emmanuel Macron
-
        Président de la République
Circonstance :
Clôture de la première journée du Sommet pour l'action sur l'IA
Texte intégral
Bonjour, Mesdames et Messieurs.
Je ne sais pas combien il y a de francophones et d'anglophones.
Je vais peut-être dire... I will say just a few words in French, if you allow me and I will switch into english.
D'abord, je veux vraiment remercier Mesdames, Messieurs les ministres,
Mesdames, Messieurs les commissaires chefs d'État, de
gouvernement
Organe collégial composé du Premier ministre, des ministres et des secrétaires d'État, chargé de l'exécution des lois et de la direction de la politique nationale
, entrepreneuses, entrepreneurs, investisseurs, très heureux de vous retrouver ici.
Merci au Grand Palais de nous accueillir.
Et au fond, ce sommet pour l'action sur l'intelligence artificielle, c'est la conviction que nous avons, en France, dans le progrès. Ce lieu a été fini en 1 900, au moment de grandes conquêtes industrielles où la France, l'Europe embrassaient une ère de progrès. Je crois que c'est exactement ce dont nous avons besoin et ce en quoi nous croyons aujourd'hui.
L'IA, c'est d'abord une formidable révolution technologique et scientifique pour le progrès et au service du progrès. Et donc c'est d'abord évidemment de la technologie, de la science, l'amélioration des tas de recherches, une transformation de beaucoup de secteurs, mais notre conviction, c'est que ça doit se faire au service de l'humanité et donc pour vivre mieux.
La deuxième chose, c'est un grand message de fierté. Par ce sommet, et grâce à la mobilisation collective, ce sont 109 milliards d'investissements privés, étrangers et français, qui sont confirmés à cette occasion. Et donc, bravo à vous tous, parce que c'est votre engagement collectif. Ce sont des data centers, ce sont des partenariats avec des grandes entreprises françaises. C'est énormément de capacités de calcul, je vais y revenir, qui vont être créées sur le territoire. C'est un message de fierté.
Et puis, troisièmement, c'est un message de continuité. Ce n'est pas ça pour relativiser les choses. Mais on en parlait ce matin, Monsieur JULIEN le disait à juste titre. L'IA, ça va apporter des tas de révolutions, des tas de choses, mais la créativité reste humaine. Et au fond, le message que je veux avoir pour vous tous, on verra tout à l'heure l'œuvre d'AGORIA. C'est de se dire, l'IA nous permet de faire des tas de révolutions. On l'a vu dans la santé encore l'autre jour, à avec Owkin et les formidables chercheurs à Villejuif. Mais cette accélération, c'est ce qu'on veut.
Donc nous, en tant que Français européens, on veut accélérer et on veut réduire l'écart. C'est ce qu'on est en train de faire avec ces 109 milliards. On veut prendre des textes, prendre des mesures pour aller de plus en plus vite. Mais à côté de ça, on veut le faire au service d'un modèle qui est le nôtre. On va continuer de défendre le droit d'auteur, les droits voisins. On va continuer de préserver la créativité humaine. Et tout ça, ce seront des assistants qui nous permettent d'aller plus vite, mais pas quelque chose qui, en quelque sorte, nous conduit à renoncer au monde auquel on croit. On continuera de protéger nos enfants, nos adolescents. On continuera de développer les valeurs qui sont les nôtres. Je crois que cette IA au service de l'humanité, c'est aussi ce à quoi on croit très profondément avec le Premier ministre MODI. C'est pour ça qu'on a voulu, ensemble, avec l'Inde, co-présider ce sommet.
Now, I will switch into English, just to say a few words.
Thank you very much for your commitment, your presence and your trust. I think with this summit, this is first, the collective ‘Choose for AI' as an enabler for our humanity to go faster, to innovate, and clearly to disrupt in healthcare, in energy, in mobility, in public services, and to be much more efficient, and to lead this transformation. This is why with Prime Minister MODI, we do believe in this revolution and in our capacity together to work in an open world, whatever the geopolitics will be, meaning to work with the US and the great US players, and a lot of them are here today, and this is a great pleasure for us, investors, companies, start-ups, to work with China, and a lot of them are here, India, and the whole world.
Second, we want to clearly use AI as an accelerator of a lot of innovations to have a better life. Now, the key message for me tonight with you, and we will revert with the head of state and government tomorrow on a lot of issues about how to have a smart regulation, how to protect public interest and so on. This why you have to choose Europe and France for AI. And this is exactly what this summit is about.
Now, Today and tomorrow, 109 billion
euro
Monnaie unique de plusieurs États membres de l'Union européenne qui forment la zone euro
of investment will be confirmed for France for the years to come. This is a great amount of investment. If you compare with some big recent announcements made in the US, it's at the right scale. This is exactly the same if we compare France to the US, as a market. This is because we have clear assets, and we want to accelerate and leverage. And on these key elements, first, we have talents. A lot of them are in this place today. Probably we have one of the best tradition of education and training in France. We train a lot of talents, we increased during the past few years. We have 40,000 per year data scientists specialized on AI and we will go to 100,000 per year.
Thanks to the announcement made during the summit, we will accelerate these programs, and we will have reserve shares, a lot of common initiative, public and private, with Saclay, Grenoble, Marseille, Paris and so on, in order to leverage on this advantage and to go faster and faster. What we want to do is to educate and train much more. But we want to keep these talents, and we want to train the whole economy. And I want to thank all the entrepreneurs and their representative here, because this is a large scale initiative we are working on in order to leverage on this issue. This is the first revolution and where France has a clear advantage.
Second, clearly, this is how to have much more data centers. We are back in the race now. Why ? Because in order to do so, you need tips. We start to accelerate the program. France is one, it's part of the European countries manufacturing tips. We will build new partnerships, partnerships with American and Asian players in order to manufacture more chips and secure our capacities. You need available spaces and energy. And here I want to showcase what is the great advantage of France. We have available land, we worked very hard with the local authorities and I want to thank the regions present here. We had identified 35 sites available.
The most important for me, we have low carbon, pilotable available energy. And this is unique, unique if you compare with the rest of the world, because we have a model of production based on nuclear energy, which means that more than 75 % of our electricity produced by this nuclear energy. It's pilotable, it's low carbon, and we produce more than what we use. Last year, we exported 90 TeraWatt, 90, which means we can localize a lot of data centers on top of what we need in terms of electricity for our own companies, our own households. So, it's very important in this world, where I have a good friend in the other part of the ocean saying, ‘drill, baby, drill'. Here there is no need to drill, it's just ‘plug, baby, plug'. Electricity is available, you can plug, it's ready. And I can tell you, we will go fast and very fast. Here we are committed to go faster and faster and to deliver this energy and this available sites.
The fourth point is this ecosystem and how to work better between the large corporates, the different verticals and AI. And today, Peugeot and Citroën finalized an agreement with Mistral. Today, a lot of our big players finalize agreements with our own solution. I think having more and more cooperation between our large corporates and this innovation is very important. And this is why I do urge the European players to buy European. Not because we don't want to buy American or Asian. I want to reassure you, but guess what ? When you are in the US and China or India, when you have a very good solution made at home, you prefer this one to the other one. And this is a good reflex. And having this ecosystem is very important. We have the best ecosystem in Europe, in France. We want to leverage on this summit in order to go faster. This is why a lot of French companies as well announce very, very big investments in order to accelerate this cooperation with public labs, with startups and so on. It's extremely important. So having this ecosystem is absolutely key. We will as well accelerate on this issue.
My last point is about adoption and acceleration. In this issue we improved with the two first AI strategy, the way to innovate on healthcare, mobility, energy. We will accelerate in these different fields with AI. A lot of our startups already are very much aggressive in this different field from Doctolib, Alan, in defense as well with healthy. We have a lot of big European players now, and we want to accelerate with them, because we got the right thanks to this 9 billion of investment, and because we are in this situation to clearly trigger a European move, we want to accelerate on two things. One, more Europe. For me, this summit is not just the announcement of a lot of investment in France. It's a wake-up call for our European strategy. Tomorrow, president VON DER LEYEN will announce the European AI strategy, and it will be a very important occasion. But this strategy will be a unique opportunity for Europe to accelerate, to simplify our regulations, to depend the single market and to invest as well in computing capacities.
We need more Europe, and we have to provide a bigger domestic market to all the startups when they start as Europeans. This is a very important strategy. We do have a key advantage in Europe. We have a lot of different research and excellence centers in healthcare, in education, in a lot of sectors. We have already comparative advantage with the US. So we will leverage on these issues. Second, we will simplify. And I will conclude on this issue. As at a national and European scale, it's very clear that we have to synchronize with the rest of the world in terms of transition, in terms of committing, in terms of authorization, clinical trials, I mean, in all the different sectors. Our key issue is about timing. We will have more private investments, we will have more public investments, we will announce new strategies, but we are most of the time too slow. I got the message to the investors today again. So I told them we will adopt the Notre-Dame de Paris strategy. I mean, we showed the rest of the world that when we commit to a clear timeline, we can deliver. You decide, you streamline all the procedures, somebody is in charge and you deliver. So the Notre-Dame approach will be adopted for data centers, for authorization, to go to the market for AI and attractiveness. Let's rush. This is what we need. I don't want to be longer. I want to thank for all the discussions you had today.
Tomorrow we will have the occasion to come back on a lot of other issues with the head of state and government. But I'm very happy that you, de facto, you choose France, you choose Europe for AI.
I'm very proud, together with Prime Minister MODI, to have this co-leadership in order to deliver this inclusive message and this willingness to invest more and to deliver much more for AI as a service of our humanity. Thank you very much for your commitment, for your creativity and your presence today.
Merci beaucoup ! Vive l'intelligence artificielle ! Vive la République et vive la France ! Merci beaucoup et je crois qu'on a une œuvre maintenant, Gloria va nous la présenter ou la lancer !
MOTS CLÉS
Sciences - Numérique - I. A.
Intelligence artificielle
Sommet
Innovation
Investissement
257000290
Haut de page